---
layout: post
title:  "We Live 100%"
date:   2016-10-25
categories: blog
---

The blog’s first post emphasized the importance of valuing practice in today’s ultra-competitive and results-oriented world.   This post examines how our minds live for a few moments of intensity, forgetting the majority of our days living on this Earth.  There is less and less time to think and reflect on the journey.  When big goals are reached, a high is experienced throughout the body.  When a tennis player wins Wimbledon or when someone wins the lottery, an immense feeling of ecstasy shocks the body.  Those that witness these moments are awed by the intensity and consequently look for their own high.  However, two observations bring these moments back to life.  1) Many studies have shown that happiness is not correlated with fame or financial success.  2) Happiness levels revert back to a base level after spikes.

We live 100% of the moments of our lives.  The majority of our lives are not spent relishing an achievement, and it shouldn’t be.  Many famous actors, directors, authors, scientists, and world leaders have admitted that they were not happier after obtaining great fame or wealth.  Many have donated their wealth and looked for other means for happiness.  Warren Buffet, Bill Gates, and many other billionaires have pledged to donate 99% of their wealth.  The CEO of Zappos Tony Hsieh and movie director Tom Shadyac have moved into trailer parks, seeking happiness that they could not get from their earnings. 

Another argument that downplays the impact of big life events is the Hedonic Treadmill concept (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hedonic_treadmill).  The idea is that a person’s happiness will revert back to the mean no matter how extreme a life event is.  Experiments have shown that a few months after a death in the family or a big career change, a person’s general happiness returns to a base level.  Fluctuations in this base level, however, are often mental.  Meditation and consistent practice strengthen the mind over time.  These philosophies focus on the 99.9% of our lives, the times when we are alone, when we are doing chores, when we are traveling, and when we are not overstimulated.  Knowing that big events in our lives do not affect our day-to-day significantly augments the importance of living in the moment, and in way one makes living our lives easier as the stress of living for the 0.1% goes away. 

As our lives whisk by in this fast-paced modern world, we often get trapped by stress and stimuli.  The adages that say “life is about the journey” or “live in the moment” are becoming more important in the modern world.  Yoga and meditation are becoming ever more popular and vital to survival.  Instead of living for a few moments of life, we should live for all the moments of life. 
















