---
layout: post
title:  "Practice As The End Goal"
date:   2016-10-19
categories: blog
---

In today’s world, we enjoy the brilliantly made end results from years of practice and preparation.  From sports events, to Hollywood movies, and to a doctor’s visit.  Our own lives are highlighted by accomplishments and big events.  Practice is boring, and we do not pay too much attention to it.  Yoga theory encourages a dedicated practice and a practice that is focused on the task at hand completely.  We all have goals, and one of the biggest goals in the modern world is to achieve more goals.  There is often a feeling of elation once the goal is reached and an expectation that our level of achievement can be maintained forever.  This concept has tricked us to become goal oriented individuals, rather than practice oriented ones.  The years of sports in high school and college will not keep us healthy for the rest of our lives or even the next five years.  Low cholesterol one year does not mean we can now eat hot dogs for every meal.  This phenomenon is evident in our ability to retain knowledge as well.  That study abroad Spanish is long gone now.  Trigonometry formulas have become hieroglyphics.

The mind and body need to be engaged constantly; periods of lethargy can cause quick and deteriorating effects.  In a recent study (http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnagi.2016.00184/full), scientists at the University of Maryland department of kinesiology showed that very fit people can lose some of the mental benefits of exercise with a very short hiatus.  They measured the blood flow of elite athletes after 10 days of minimal physical activity.  The results showed significant changes in the brain, concluding that even with years of intense training, our bodies can deteriorate quickly.  Our body and minds need constant practice to maintain levels of usability. 

To achieve this consistent practice, yoga promotes being present and looking at the details of the practice rather than the accomplishments.  This characteristic is extremely important when attempting to achieve long term goals.  Marathon runners are not constantly thinking about the finish.  College professors are not constantly thinking about that Nobel Prize that they might get one day.  Success comes when each moment is enjoyed as part of something bigger.  Practice is necessary to keep our minds and bodies effective, and it is the key building block for success.  When thinking about our own health, career, and relationships, it is important to remember the present and practice.  When practice becomes our end goal, we have achieved.

