---
layout: post
title:  "Fear & Optimism"
date:   2016-12-21
categories: blog
---

​People have different personalities and levels of risk aversion, and these traits change with experiences.  Exposure to stress and loss may increase negativity and fear.  Conversely, camaraderie and good luck may do the opposite.  Fear has become a dominant force in media, exemplified by the latest US presidential election.  The media psychologists have realized the attention grabbing characteristic of fear and have loaded their arsenal with as much of it as possible.  The worst response to this fear is hostility, especially if the fear is not rationally understood.

The core message of the movie “How to Train Your Own Dragon” challenges the ignorance associated with fear.  The tough Viking colony is in constant battle with the perceived vicious dragons that occupy the same land.  It takes an intelligent, compassionate, and bold child to question that fear and create harmony.  The dragons are not faultless either.  Their hostile response to the Vikings augmented the chaos. 

Fear affects people differently.  Under immense pressure and stress, aggression and hostility are inevitable.  It takes a high level of optimism and understanding to react calmly and rationally.  The domino effect of fear then aggression, then hostility, and more fear is extremely dangerous.  Fear is not always something that we can control, and the emotional response is certainly real.  There are two responsibilities that we do have.  The first is to learn about the fear and to understand why we are scared.  Blind fear has no benefits.  The second responsibility is to take on the risk of potential disaster (or likely no disaster) and be more optimistic.  Imagining worst case scenarios produces irrational behavior and more fear.  Life is not predictable, and living one defensively produces negativity for the mind and can even consume the mind.  Acts of kindness, smiles, and often just the lack of hostility can create more peace and happiness, especially in the face of fear and hostility.  The domino effect of kindness, then love, then optimism, and more kindness can be just as powerful.  The psychological effect of optimism pervades the mind and can spread wildly to those around us.  Optimism, by definition, combats fear.  As well-known psychologist Amos Tversky puts it: “when you are a pessimist and the bad thing happens, you live it twice. Once when you worry about it, and the second time when it happens.” 
















