---
layout: post
title:  "Future State Of Mind"
date:   2017-08-25
categories: blog
featured-img: emile-perron-190221
---

How often do you think about the future? Thoughts about the near future — what is for dinner?  What should I wear tomorrow? Who should I hang out with on the weekend? Or thoughts about the distant future — Will I have enough money? How will I die? How will I meet my future spouse? How many kids will I have?

The future is when our hopes and dreams will be realized.  Modern society thrives on our ability to imagine tomorrow.  This is why thousands of Silicon Valley companies produce million-dollar valuations with no profits.  Amazon and Facebook are worth billions on expectations of returns in 5 or 10 years.  If our economy remains in status quo for even 1 year, the stock market would plunge, likely resulting in the biggest recession in history.

To be fair, our future thinking minds have produced great achievements.  Medical advances have greatly reduced child mortality rates and cured deadly diseases.  Skype and FaceTime allow video communication between family members who live far apart.  A large portion of the world no longer struggle with food shortages.  These luxuries would not be possible without the desire and the pressure to improve. 

As the world grows, the burden to keep pace balloons.  Companies are targeting revenues in much shorter horizons.  New cellphone models appear every few months.  Competition in schools is intensifying.  The consequences fall on the individual.  Thinking about the future can be rooted in a few emotional states.  On one spectrum, compassion sprouts progress, as glorified by numerous Silicon Valley catchphrases.  CEO of SalesForce Marc Benioff explains, “The secret to successful hiring is this: look for the people who want to change the world.”  On the other extreme, fear or boredom pushes the individual to action — some even argue that the fear of death is the sole impetus of all human progress.  Good decision making and a healthy mind depend on the understanding of these emotional states.

Being consumed by the future is very dangerous.  The future is awfully unpredictable, and as the complexity of our lives augments, certainty disappears.  A feedback loop is created — someone plans for the future, the future changes so much that the plan fails, the person becomes a bit more distressed, and the person plans for the future in even greater detail.  Robert Burns famously explains, “The best-laid plans of mice and men often go awry.”   Big changes happen every few years, and dreading potential catastrophe in 10 or 30 years is unproductive and a cause of stress and depression.  Humans have accomplished so much, and appreciating the fruits of our labor here and now is extremely blissful.  Worrying simply makes the present a little bit worse.
















