---
layout: post
title:  "Put The Blame On Me"
date:   2017-09-01
categories: blog
featured-img: shane-rounce-205187
---

In today’s individualistic world, the one thing we do not like to be distinguished for is blame.  Music artist Akon exclaims, “Why doesn’t anybody wanna take blame…You can put the blame on me. Said you can put the blame on me.”  In our daily lives, we rarelyheed his advice.  The gym is too far away.  Our spouses do not complement us enough.  No one recognizes our value at work.  Our natural tendency is to point the finger at anything else, and the consequences of this way of thinking are severe. 

In the examples above, diverting blame hinders our health, our relationships, and our careers.  Because the gym is too far away, we exercise less.  We might file for divorce because of frequent fights with our spouses.  At work, we decide to contribute less since no one appreciates our work anyways.  If we exonerate ourselves of any fault, these issues remain, and we become perpetual victims.

What if we approached all issues from a different perspective, one that puts the accountability on ourselves?  Rather than agonizing over someone else’s problems or bad luck, we improve our own characters.   An employer might display signs of sexism or racism.  Disgust and hatred for the employer naturally arise, but putting the responsibility to change on ourselves sprouts great benefits.  Mental stress from anger or the desire to harm others diminishes.  Once the mind is clear, we act rationally and do not succumb to short term cravings.  Rather than feeling victimized, we switch to companies with nondiscriminatory management.  We might even observe our own biases, think about times when we favored one person over another because of race, talent, height, culture, or gender, and ultimately develop more compassion and fairness for everyone.  It is extremely counterproductive if the suffering from someone’s bias evolves into a sense of superiority for our own race, talent, or culture.

The desire to fault others naturally and easily originates in our minds, but shifting the initial reaction to a critique of ourselves improves future actions.  This technique reduces pain for everyone and begins to eradicate hate and violence.  Of course, we cannot fix all the problems of the world, and too much pressure on ourselves is ineffective.  The goal is to think clearly and commit to actions that help.  Many activists and leaders of social change believe that progress happens when a large group of people act constructively on an individual level.  We owe it to ourselves, our communities, and our world to take responsibility, and along the way we are happy. 
















