---
layout: post
title:  "Judging Crimes"
date:   2017-10-06
categories: blog
featured-img: sleek
---

From the Code of Hammurabi to the US Constitution, appropriate crime and punishment exemplify fairness.  Jaywalking and murder differ in consequence.  This blog post juxtaposes two types of crimes — those committed out of anger and those derived from desire.  Anger here refers to a general state of agitation while desire describes a craving for something pleasant and an aversion for something unpleasant.  Much of our judicial system evaluates crime on its end result, an apt and practical method.  However, a just society must understand its crimes’ origins.

Marcus Aurelius proclaims in Meditations: “the sin committed out of pleasure deserves a harsher rebuke than the one committed out of pain. The angry man is more like a victim of wrongdoing, provoked by pain to anger. The other man rushes into wrongdoing on his own, moved to action by desire.”  Anger clouds rational thought and is often preceded by suffering and followed by regret.  Crimes of desire are not 100% rational but driven more by rooted ill will.  In order to assess crimes fairly, we must improve our own judgement, dig into the motivation behind the crimes, and bring new factors — government policy, cultural environment, and upbringing — into the evaluation.

Anger frequents in environments of stress and hardship, and its sensually vivid crimes instill strong reactions. On the flip side, desire and its subgroups — laziness, passivity, fear, etc — produce many wrongdoings that harm silently.  Over time these evils destroy the environment, stifle freedoms, and generate anger.  Examining the various protests in history, a simple formula describes their nature: those with power desire more, committing crimes that cause anger in the powerless, and revolt ensues.  Crimes of oppression versus crimes of resistance may differ in energy, but time and time again, oppression harms more deeply.  Martin Luther King Jr. and his supporters were jailed numerous times for protests but most would agree that their crimes were far less severe than the collective repression that they were fighting. 

I recently attended a Yom Kippur atonement service, and one unique insight was this need to redefine iniquities in today’s world.  We examined a list of modern sins written by political activist and Rabbi Michael Lerner (https://www.vbs.org/worship/meet-our-clergy/keri/blog/modern-sins).  Here is an excerpt: “the sins of accepting the current distribution of wealth and power as unchangeable…the sins of giving up on social change and focusing exclusively on personal advancement and success…the sins of dulling our outrage at the continuation of poverty, oppression, and violence in this world.”   We are finally waking up to the consequences of indifference.  Crimes of anger are not justifiable, but we must view crimes of desire with equal if not more severity; our moral value of fairness depends on it. 
















