---
layout: post
title:  "Fear & Greed"
date:   2017-01-18
categories: blog
---

CNN has an index that measures two major emotions of the markets – fear and greed.  Greed fuels the stock market to high levels while fear reverses the trend, often rapidly.  As more companies get bigger and go public, more companies fall into the grips of fear and greed.  The employees, the costumers, and anyone else involved become second-hand victims of the capitalism machine. 

Some fear and greed is beneficial for human life.  Many of the advancements in human history can be attributed to ambition.  The free markets produce myriad improvements to our lives and fuel tremendous growth.  Similarly, fear stimulates change and development.  The advent of religion and the progress in medicine can be rooted in the fear of death.   Fear of other groups actually increases cooperation and cohesion within a group.  However, excess fear or greed can ruin a person and a society. 

Defining excess fear is not easy, but looking at what people were afraid of in the past can be useful.   Thousands of years ago, we were afraid of famine, disease, and not being able to find a warm shelter.  Today, these issues are ameliorated for many people, and a new set of fears have taken over.  The fear of not finding a job with meaning, the fear of not keeping up with the latest trends, the fear of not getting into a good college, and the fear of missing out (FOMO) top the list.  These concerns are valid, but when they manifest in the form of fear, individual and communal happiness are in jeopardy, and that fear should be labeled as excess.  Greed acts in a similar way.  As many people stop worrying about their basic needs, they get greedy and agitate over minute problems in their bubbles of a life.  There is even a term for this phenomenon called “First World Problems” – the Huffington Post has a few great examples on this (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/streeter-seidell-/first-world-problems_b_4117701.html).   If the amount of energy associated with excess fear and greed were transferred to charity, many real world problems can be solved.

Excess fear and greed generate negative thoughts for an individual and translate into conflict for a society.  Fear, in the face of real danger, can help for survival.  When that same fear appears in less consequential scenarios, irrational and emotional decisions can be made.  Fear is a key tool in marketing, and many advertising campaigns use fear to illicit irrational decisions in consumers.  Do you really need that extra-thermal, extra-down, and extra-weather proof jacket?  In a more serious note, fear of new and different people has created immense injustices and social divides.  Greed works in a similar way.  The greed addiction generates a momentary high, and in the process sacrifices the happiness from acts of generosity.  These emotions create a tremendous amount of negativity in the mind and escalate developments of anxiety and depression.  As fear and greed dominate culture and society, large amounts of animosity and division will appear.  It Is not easy to cut back on these human emotions, but awareness of the detriments personally and societally is the first step.  Albert Einstein famously explains: “Three great forces rule the world: stupidity, fear, and greed.”
















